# VICatMix-paper
Code and data to reproduce results from *VICatMix: variational Bayesian clustering and variable selection for discrete biomedical data*.

Each simulation scenario and each study on real-world data is separated into folders, with code for any data pre-processing needed, code to produce the results, and code to produce the plot.

The code used to run VICatMix in all simulations is contained in the folder VICatMix-code, where "Variational Mixture Model.R" is the main code for VICatMix without variable selection, and "VariationalMixtureModelVarSel" is the main code for VICatMix with variable selection. These both source "E Step", "M Step", and "ELBO Calc" R code files as well as Cpp functions for the variational algorithm. All functions used are identical to those used in the VICatMix R package.

Sample data in simulation scenarios is generated by the R file 'GenerateSampleData.R', located in the folder VICatMix-code.

### Data for the real-world scenarios is available at:
1) Galactose (Ideker et al. (2001), Medvedovic et al. (2004)) : The data used (205 genes with imputed values) can be downloaded from the [Supplementary Material](https://web.archive.org/web/20081006084341/http://expression.microslu.washington.edu/expression/kayee/medvedovic2003/medvedovic_bioinf2003.html) for Medvedovic et al. (2004).

2) AML (Hoadley et al. (2018)): Mutation data can be downloaded from [cBioPortal](https://www.cbioportal.org/study/summary?id=laml_tcga_pan_can_atlas_2018).

3) Pan-cancer COCA analysis (Hoadley et al. (2014)): All data can be downloaded from [Synapse](https://www.synapse.org/Synapse:syn2468297/wiki/64259).

### References:
Hoadley, K. A., Yau, C., Wolf, D. M., Cherniack, A. D., Tamborero, D., Ng, S., Leiserson, M. D. M., Niu, B., McLellan, M. D., Uzunangelov, V., Zhang, J., Kandoth, C., Akbani, R., Shen, H., Omberg, L., Chu, A., Margolin, A. A., van’t Veer, L. J., Lopez-Bigas, N., … Stuart, J. M. (2014). Multiplatform Analysis of 12 Cancer Types Reveals Molecular Classification within and across Tissues of Origin. In Cell (Vol. 158, Issue 4, pp. 929–944). Elsevier BV.

Hoadley, K. A., Yau, C., Hinoue, T., Wolf, D. M., Lazar, A. J., Drill, E., Shen, R., Taylor, A. M., Cherniack, A. D., Thorsson, V., Akbani, R., Bowlby, R., Wong, C. K., Wiznerowicz, M., Sanchez-Vega, F., Robertson, A. G., Schneider, B. G., Lawrence, M. S., Noushmehr, H., … Mariamidze, A. (2018). Cell-of-Origin Patterns Dominate the Molecular Classification of 10,000 Tumors from 33 Types of Cancer. In Cell (Vol. 173, Issue 2, pp. 291-304.e6). Elsevier BV.

Ideker, T., Thorsson, V., Ranish, J. A., Christmas, R., Buhler, J., Eng, J. K., Bumgarner, R., Goodlett, D. R., Aebersold, R., & Hood, L. (2001). Integrated Genomic and Proteomic Analyses of a Systematically Perturbed Metabolic Network. In Science (Vol. 292, Issue 5518, pp. 929–934). American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).

Medvedovic, M., Yeung, K. Y., & Bumgarner, R. E. (2004). Bayesian mixture model based clustering of replicated microarray data. In Bioinformatics (Vol. 20, Issue 8, pp. 1222–1232). Oxford University Press (OUP).



